pages/02.blog/01.problems/p031-piped-ants/item.en.md, before:

---
title: "Problem #031 - piped ants"
---

A bunch of ants are left inside a very, very, tight tube,
and they keep colliding with each other and turning around.
How long will it take them to escape?

===

![](thumbnail.png "Photo by Lorenz Lippert on Unsplash.")


### Problem statement

Suppose you have a very thin pipe.
The pipe is the exact width of an ant, so that ants
can travel inside the pipe, but they can't cross paths because
the pipe isn't wide enough for that.
Assume an ant takes exactly 1h to travel through said pipe.

I will now place several ants along the pipe, facing different
directions, and all ants will start walking in a straight line.
When two ants collide, they both turn around and continue
walking in the opposite direction they were walking in.
When an ant reaches the end of the pipe, the ant just leaves the pipe.

What is the shortest amount of time that ensures all ants have left the pipe?


### Solution

The solution to this problem will be posted [here][sol] after this problem has been live for 2 weeks.
Feel free to [email me][email] your solution or to comment it here if you want it featured in the [solution page][sol].
<!--You can read the solution [here][sol] to compare with your own solution.
You can also use that link to post your own solution in the comments! Please avoid posting spoilers in the comments here.-->

---

If you enjoyed the problem and would like to get new problems directly in your inbox, be sure to [subscribe to the Problems newsletter][subscribe].

[email]: mailto:rodrigo@mathspp.com?subject=Solution%20to%20{{ page.title|regex_replace(['/ /'], ['%20']) }}
[subscribe]: https://mathspp.com/subscribe
[sol]: ../../solutions/{{ page.slug }}

Commit message:

Update solution and problem files.

pages/02.blog/01.problems/p031-piped-ants/item.en.md, after:

---
title: "Problem #031 - piped ants"
---

A bunch of ants are left inside a very, very, tight tube,
and they keep colliding with each other and turning around.
How long will it take them to escape?

===

![](thumbnail.png "Photo by Lorenz Lippert on Unsplash.")


### Problem statement

Suppose you have a very thin pipe.
The pipe is the exact width of an ant, so that ants
can travel inside the pipe, but they can't cross paths because
the pipe isn't wide enough for that.
Assume an ant takes exactly 1h to travel through said pipe.

I will now place several ants along the pipe, facing different
directions, and all ants will start walking in a straight line.
When two ants collide, they both turn around and continue
walking in the opposite direction they were walking in.
When an ant reaches the end of the pipe, the ant just leaves the pipe.

What is the shortest amount of time that ensures all ants have left the pipe?


### Solution

You can read the solution [here][sol] to compare with your own solution.
You can also use that link to post your own solution in the comments! Please avoid posting spoilers in the comments here.

---

If you enjoyed the problem and would like to get new problems directly in your inbox, be sure to [subscribe to the Problems newsletter][subscribe].

[email]: mailto:rodrigo@mathspp.com?subject=Solution%20to%20{{ page.title|regex_replace(['/ /'], ['%20']) }}
[subscribe]: https://mathspp.com/subscribe
[sol]: ../../solutions/{{ page.slug }}
