pages/02.blog/uv-cheatsheet/item.md, before:

Cheatsheet with the most common and useful uv commands to manage projects and dependencies, publish projects, manage tools, and more.

===


This cheatsheet lists the most commonly used commands and should be more than enough for you to get started using uv.
For more advanced use cases, check [the uv docs](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) and its guides.

!!! Last updated for uv version 0.9.0.

![A4 cheatsheet with the content from this blog post shown in light, dark, and high-contrast themes.](_uv-cheatsheets.webp "Downloadable cheatsheet.")

[Download this cheatsheet](https://gumroad.com/l/cheatsheet-uv?classes=btn,btn-lg,btn-center)


## Creating projects 🧱

| | |
| - | - |
| `uv init` | Initialise a project in the current directory |
| `uv init myproj` | Initialise a project `myproj` in the directory `myproj` |
| `uv init --app --package ...` | Initialise a packageable app (e.g., CLI, web app, ...) |
| `uv init --lib --package ...` | Initialise a packageable library (code you import) |
| `uv init --python 3.X ...`[^1] | Use Python 3.X for your project |

[^1]: The `--python 3.X` option is transversal to almost everything in uv.


## Managing project dependencies 🧩

| | |
| - | - |
| `uv add requests` | Add `requests` as a dependency |
| `uv add A B C` | Add `A`, `B`, and `C` as dependencies |
| `uv add -r requirements.txt` | Add dependencies from the file `requirements.txt` |
| `uv add --dev pytest` | Add `pytest` as a development dependency |
| `uv run pytest` | Run the pytest executable that is installed in your project |
| `uv remove requests` | Remove `requests` as a dependency |
| `uv remove A B C` | Remove `A`, `B`, `C`, and their transitive dependencies |
| `uv tree` | See the project dependencies tree |
| `uv lock --upgrade` | Upgrade the dependencies' versions |

![](_light-managing-dependencies.svg)


## Project lifecycle management 🔄

| | |
| - | - |
| `uv build` | Build your packageable project |
| `uv publish` | Publish your packageable project to PyPI |
| `uv version` | Check your project version |
| `uv version --bump major` | Bump project major version (e.g., `0.3.2 -> 1.0.0`) |
| `uv version --bump minor --bump beta` | Bump minor version into a beta (e.g., `1.0.0 -> 1.1.0b1` or `1.1.0b1 -> 1.1.0b2`) |
| `uv version --bump rc` | Bump version into release candidate (e.g., `1.1.0b1 -> 1.1.0rc1` or `1.1.0rc1 -> 1.1.0rc2`) |
| `uv version --bump stable` | Turn into a stable version (e.g., `1.1.0rc1 -> 1.1.0`) |


## Managing tools ⚒️

| | |
| - | - |
| `uv tool run pytest` | Run `pytest` in an isolated environment |
| `uv tool run textual-demo --from textual` | Run the command `textual-demo` from the package `textual` |
| `uvx ...` | Alias for `uv tool run ...` |
| `uv tool install ruff` | Install `ruff` in an isolated environment but make it globally available |
| `uv tool install --with dep ...` | Install the given tool with extra dependencies (e.g., install a tool _with_ its plugins) |
| `uv tool list` | List all tools installed |
| `uv tool upgrade ruff` | Upgrade the `ruff` tool |
| `uv tool upgrade --all` | Upgrade all tools |
| `uv tool uninstall ruff` | Uninstall `ruff` |
| `uv tool install -e .`[^2] | Install the current packageable project in editable mode |

[^2]: If your project provides a CLI, for example, this makes the CLI globally available on your computer. Making it editable with `-e` means that if you update your code, you don't have to reinstall explicitly.


## Working with scripts 📜

| | |
| - | - |
| `uv init --script myscript.py` | Initialise the script `myscript.py` |
| `uv init --script myscript.py --python 3.X` | Initialise the script `myscript.py` and pin it to version 3.X |
| `uv add click --script myscript.py` | Add the dependency `click` to the script |
| `uv remove click --script myscript.py` | Remove the dependency `click` from the script |
| `uv run myscript.py` | Run the script `myscript.py` |
| `uv run --python 3.X myscript.py` | Run the script with the given Python version |
| `uv run --with click myscript.py` | Run the script along with the `click` dependency |

!!! Make your script executable and add the uv shebang at the very first line of the script: `#!/usr/bin/env -S uv run`.
!!! This way, you can run your script directly as `./myscript.py` instead of having to write `uv run myscript.py`.


## Manage Python versions 🐍

| | |
| - | - |
| `uv python list` | List Python versions you have installed and versions you can install |
| `uv python install 3.X` | Install Python 3.X |
| `uv python uninstall 3.X` | Uninstall Python 3.X |
| `uv run python` | Run your default Python |
| `uv run --python 3.X python` | Run Python 3.X |
| `uv python upgrade` | Upgrade your Python versions |
| `uv python pin 3.X` | Pin to a specific Python version |


## For old timers who don't learn new tricks 👴👵

| | |
| - | - |
| `uv venv path/to/.venv` | Create a virtual environment at `path/to/.venv` |
| `uv pip` | pip's interface with uv's speed ⚡️ |


## Miscellaneous commands ✨

| | |
| - | - |
| `uv format` | Format your code with Ruff |


## Meta commands 🪞

| | |
| - | - |
| `uv help cmd` | See the help for the command `cmd` |
| `uv self update` | Update uv version |
| `uv self version` | Check uv version |


[Download this cheatsheet](https://gumroad.com/l/cheatsheet-uv?classes=btn,btn-lg,btn-center)

Commit message:

Add table sections as diagrams.

pages/02.blog/uv-cheatsheet/item.md, after:

Cheatsheet with the most common and useful uv commands to manage projects and dependencies, publish projects, manage tools, and more.

===


This cheatsheet lists the most commonly used commands and should be more than enough for you to get started using uv.
For more advanced use cases, check [the uv docs](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) and its guides.

!!! Last updated for uv version 0.9.0.

![A4 cheatsheet with the content from this blog post shown in light, dark, and high-contrast themes.](_uv-cheatsheets.webp "Downloadable cheatsheet.")

[Download this cheatsheet](https://gumroad.com/l/cheatsheet-uv?classes=btn,btn-lg,btn-center)


## Creating projects 🧱

| | |
| - | - |
| `uv init` | Initialise a project in the current directory |
| `uv init myproj` | Initialise a project `myproj` in the directory `myproj` |
| `uv init --app --package ...` | Initialise a packageable app (e.g., CLI, web app, ...) |
| `uv init --lib --package ...` | Initialise a packageable library (code you import) |
| `uv init --python 3.X ...`[^1] | Use Python 3.X for your project |

![Section of the cheatsheet about creating projects shown as a diagram. Contains the same content as the table above.](_light-creating-projects.svg)

[^1]: The `--python 3.X` option is transversal to almost everything in uv.


## Managing project dependencies 🧩

| | |
| - | - |
| `uv add requests` | Add `requests` as a dependency |
| `uv add A B C` | Add `A`, `B`, and `C` as dependencies |
| `uv add -r requirements.txt` | Add dependencies from the file `requirements.txt` |
| `uv add --dev pytest` | Add `pytest` as a development dependency |
| `uv run pytest` | Run the pytest executable that is installed in your project |
| `uv remove requests` | Remove `requests` as a dependency |
| `uv remove A B C` | Remove `A`, `B`, `C`, and their transitive dependencies |
| `uv tree` | See the project dependencies tree |
| `uv lock --upgrade` | Upgrade the dependencies' versions |

![Section of the cheatsheet about managing project dependencies shown as a diagram. Contains the same content as the table above.](_light-managing-dependencies.svg)


## Project lifecycle management 🔄

| | |
| - | - |
| `uv build` | Build your packageable project |
| `uv publish` | Publish your packageable project to PyPI |
| `uv version` | Check your project version |
| `uv version --bump major` | Bump project major version (e.g., `0.3.2 -> 1.0.0`) |
| `uv version --bump minor --bump beta` | Bump minor version into a beta (e.g., `1.0.0 -> 1.1.0b1` or `1.1.0b1 -> 1.1.0b2`) |
| `uv version --bump rc` | Bump version into release candidate (e.g., `1.1.0b1 -> 1.1.0rc1` or `1.1.0rc1 -> 1.1.0rc2`) |
| `uv version --bump stable` | Turn into a stable version (e.g., `1.1.0rc1 -> 1.1.0`) |

![Section of the cheatsheet about managing project lifecycle shown as a diagram. Contains the same content as the table above.](_light-project-lifecycle.svg)


## Managing tools ⚒️

| | |
| - | - |
| `uv tool run pytest` | Run `pytest` in an isolated environment |
| `uv tool run textual-demo --from textual` | Run the command `textual-demo` from the package `textual` |
| `uvx ...` | Alias for `uv tool run ...` |
| `uv tool install ruff` | Install `ruff` in an isolated environment but make it globally available |
| `uv tool install --with dep ...` | Install the given tool with extra dependencies (e.g., install a tool _with_ its plugins) |
| `uv tool list` | List all tools installed |
| `uv tool upgrade ruff` | Upgrade the `ruff` tool |
| `uv tool upgrade --all` | Upgrade all tools |
| `uv tool uninstall ruff` | Uninstall `ruff` |
| `uv tool install -e .`[^2] | Install the current packageable project in editable mode |

![Section of the cheatsheet about managing tools shown as a diagram. Contains the same content as the table above.](_light-tools.svg)

[^2]: If your project provides a CLI, for example, this makes the CLI globally available on your computer. Making it editable with `-e` means that if you update your code, you don't have to reinstall explicitly.


## Working with scripts 📜

| | |
| - | - |
| `uv init --script myscript.py` | Initialise the script `myscript.py` |
| `uv init --script myscript.py --python 3.X` | Initialise the script `myscript.py` and pin it to version 3.X |
| `uv add click --script myscript.py` | Add the dependency `click` to the script |
| `uv remove click --script myscript.py` | Remove the dependency `click` from the script |
| `uv run myscript.py` | Run the script `myscript.py` |
| `uv run --python 3.X myscript.py` | Run the script with the given Python version |
| `uv run --with click myscript.py` | Run the script along with the `click` dependency |

!!! Make your script executable and add the uv shebang at the very first line of the script: `#!/usr/bin/env -S uv run`.
!!! This way, you can run your script directly as `./myscript.py` instead of having to write `uv run myscript.py`.

![Section of the cheatsheet about working with scripts shown as a diagram. Contains the same content as the table above.](_light-working-with-scripts.svg)


## Manage Python versions 🐍

| | |
| - | - |
| `uv python list` | List Python versions you have installed and versions you can install |
| `uv python install 3.X` | Install Python 3.X |
| `uv python uninstall 3.X` | Uninstall Python 3.X |
| `uv run python` | Run your default Python |
| `uv run --python 3.X python` | Run Python 3.X |
| `uv python upgrade` | Upgrade your Python versions |
| `uv python pin 3.X` | Pin to a specific Python version |

![Section of the cheatsheet about managing Python installations shown as a diagram. Contains the same content as the table above.](_light-python-management.svg)


## For old timers who don't learn new tricks 👴👵

| | |
| - | - |
| `uv venv path/to/.venv` | Create a virtual environment at `path/to/.venv` |
| `uv pip` | pip's interface with uv's speed ⚡️ |

![Section of the cheatsheet about uv's interface for `pip` and `venv` shown as a diagram. Contains the same content as the table above.](_light-for-old-timers.svg)


## Miscellaneous commands ✨

| | |
| - | - |
| `uv format` | Format your code with Ruff |

![Section of the cheatsheet about miscellaneous commands shown as a diagram. Contains the same content as the table above.](_light-miscellaneous.svg)


## Meta commands 🪞

| | |
| - | - |
| `uv help cmd` | See the help for the command `cmd` |
| `uv self update` | Update uv version |
| `uv self version` | Check uv version |

![Section of the cheatsheet about meta commands shown as a diagram. Contains the same content as the table above.](_light-meta-commands.svg)


[Download this cheatsheet](https://gumroad.com/l/cheatsheet-uv?classes=btn,btn-lg,btn-center)
