pages/03.workshops/03.intro-latex/default.en.md, before:

---
title: Introduction to LaTeX
---

# Introduction to LaTeX

## Aim

The aim of this workshop is to introduce people to typesetting with LaTeX. LaTeX is a system that allows one to write some commands that are then rendered as formulas.

As an example, `$x^2$` gets rendered as $x^2$. In a mathematics course it turns out to be very helpful to know how to use LaTeX decently. The workshop just gives an overview of the type of things that can be done and that we, as maths students, eventually need to use.

## Additional resources

Besides sharing [a complete template with everything we cover in the workshop (and more!)][gh-doc], I always point the students to these _really_ helpful resources:

 - the [TeX Paste][texpaste] tool, that allows you to create permanent links to formulas to share easily;
 - the [Overleaf][overleaf] website, where one can create LaTeX documents online and edit them collaboratively and online;
 - the [latex.stackexchange][latexse] website, where I search for how to do X or Y, whenever I want to do something that is not immediately obvious;
 - the [codecogs][codecogs] site, where one can typeset formulas and check if the result is making any sense. It also has a nice palette of frequently-used symbols, so that we don't have to type them out;
 - the [detexify][detexify] website, very helpful when you know how to draw a symbol but don't know its name;
 - [this website][tables] that makes it easier to create table.

[texpaste]: https://mathspp.com/texpaste
[overleaf]: https://www.overleaf.com?r=ff360a64&rm=d&rs=b
[latexse]: https://tex.stackexchange.com/
[codecogs]: https://www.codecogs.com/latex/eqneditor.php
[detexify]: http://detexify.kirelabs.org/classify.html
[tables]: https://www.tablesgenerator.com/
[gh-doc]: https://github.com/RojerGS/workshops/tree/master/intro-latex

Commit message:

Add feedback to LaTeX workshop.

pages/03.workshops/03.intro-latex/default.en.md, after:

---
title: Introduction to LaTeX
---

# Introduction to LaTeX

## Aim

The aim of this workshop is to introduce people to typesetting with LaTeX. LaTeX is a system that allows one to write some commands that are then rendered as formulas.

As an example, `$x^2$` gets rendered as $x^2$. In a mathematics course it turns out to be very helpful to know how to use LaTeX decently. The workshop just gives an overview of the type of things that can be done and that we, as maths students, eventually need to use.

## Feedback

Here is what some people had to say about the contents of the workshop and the way I led it:

 > “*An excelent introduction to LaTeX, in a friendly environment, with time to introduce not only the basics but also the important and useful details.*”  &mdash; António Figueiras

<!-- -->

 > “*Explained objectively and with very interesting tips. Simple language and concrete examples.*”  &mdash; Carolina Salvador

<!-- -->

 > “*The information provided was relevant and will be useful for my degree, it was given in a way that was easy to understand and laid the foundations to work with LaTeX.*”  &mdash; Anonymous


## Additional resources

Besides sharing [a complete template with everything we cover in the workshop (and more!)][gh-doc], I always point the students to these _really_ helpful resources:

 - the [TeX Paste][texpaste] tool, that allows you to create permanent links to formulas to share easily;
 - the [Overleaf][overleaf] website, where one can create LaTeX documents online and edit them collaboratively and online;
 - the [latex.stackexchange][latexse] website, where I search for how to do X or Y, whenever I want to do something that is not immediately obvious;
 - the [codecogs][codecogs] site, where one can typeset formulas and check if the result is making any sense. It also has a nice palette of frequently-used symbols, so that we don't have to type them out;
 - the [detexify][detexify] website, very helpful when you know how to draw a symbol but don't know its name;
 - [this website][tables] that makes it easier to create table.

[texpaste]: https://mathspp.com/texpaste
[overleaf]: https://www.overleaf.com?r=ff360a64&rm=d&rs=b
[latexse]: https://tex.stackexchange.com/
[codecogs]: https://www.codecogs.com/latex/eqneditor.php
[detexify]: http://detexify.kirelabs.org/classify.html
[tables]: https://www.tablesgenerator.com/
[gh-doc]: https://github.com/RojerGS/workshops/tree/master/intro-latex
