pages/02.blog/01.problems/p028-hidden-key/item.en.md, before:

---
metadata:
    description: "Three boxes, three coins and a hidden key - can you find it?"
title: "Problem #028 - hidden key"
---

There is a key hidden in one of three boxes and each box has a coin on top of it.
Can you use the coins to let your friend know where the key is hiding?

===

![A photograph of a key, by Aneta Pawlik on Unsplash.](thumbnail.jpg)

### Problem statement

You and your best friend are locked in jail for no reason at all, but you are
given the opportunity to escape.
You are taken to a room that has three opaque boxes.
The key to your cell will be put inside one of the boxes, and then a (regular)
coin is placed on top of each box.
You may flip a single coin, and then your friend will enter the room.

When your friend enters the room you are not allowed to talk, and your friend
must open a box.
If your friend opens the box with the key, you are set free.
Otherwise, you are locked for eternity...

What is the strategy that you and your friend should agree upon, so that
your friend can always find the key?

!!! Give it some thought...

If you need any clarification whatsoever, feel free to ask in the comment section below.

### Solution

The solution to this problem will be posted [here][sol] after this problem has been live for 2 weeks.
You can also use that link to post your own solution in the comments! Please **do not** post spoilers in the comments here.
<!--You can read the solution [here][sol] to compare with your own solution.
You can also use that link to post your own solution in the comments! Please **do not** post spoilers in the comments here.-->

---

If you enjoyed the problem and would like to get new problems directly in your inbox, be sure to [subscribe to the Problems newsletter][subscribe].

[subscribe]: https://mathspp.com/subscribe
[sol]: ../../solutions/{{ page.slug }}

Commit message:

Clarify the meaning of 'flip the coin'.

pages/02.blog/01.problems/p028-hidden-key/item.en.md, after:

---
metadata:
    description: "Three boxes, three coins and a hidden key - can you find it?"
title: "Problem #028 - hidden key"
---

There is a key hidden in one of three boxes and each box has a coin on top of it.
Can you use the coins to let your friend know where the key is hiding?

===

![A photograph of a key, by Aneta Pawlik on Unsplash.](thumbnail.jpg)

### Problem statement

You and your best friend are locked in jail for no reason at all, but you are
given the opportunity to escape.
You are taken to a room that has three opaque boxes.
The key to your cell will be put inside one of the boxes, and then a (regular)
coin is placed on top of each box.
You may pick a single coin and reverse its face up,
and then your friend will enter the room.

When your friend enters the room you are not allowed to talk, and your friend
must open a box.
If your friend opens the box with the key, you are set free.
Otherwise, you are locked for eternity...

What is the strategy that you and your friend should agree upon, so that
your friend can always find the key?

!!! Give it some thought...

If you need any clarification whatsoever, feel free to ask in the comment section below.

### Solution

The solution to this problem will be posted [here][sol] after this problem has been live for 2 weeks.
You can also use that link to post your own solution in the comments! Please **do not** post spoilers in the comments here.
<!--You can read the solution [here][sol] to compare with your own solution.
You can also use that link to post your own solution in the comments! Please **do not** post spoilers in the comments here.-->

---

If you enjoyed the problem and would like to get new problems directly in your inbox, be sure to [subscribe to the Problems newsletter][subscribe].

[subscribe]: https://mathspp.com/subscribe
[sol]: ../../solutions/{{ page.slug }}
