pages/02.blog/02.problems/p053-weighing-the-odd-one-out/item.md, before:

Can you find the fake ball by weighing it?

===

![](thumbnail.png "Photo by AlSimonov on Getty Images.")

# Problem statement

You have 12 balls, 11 of which are identical and weigh exactly the same.
The 12th ball _looks_ like all the others, but it is fake, and is either lighter or heavier.

Can you figure out which of the 12 balls is the fake one and whether it is lighter or heavier than the others?
You can make use of a [traditional scale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weighing_scale) with two plates,
although you have no weights at your disposal.
Also, the scale is so rusty it will stop working soon and you can only use it three times.


# Solvers

<!--
Congratulations to the ones that solved this problem correctly and, in particular, to the ones
who sent me their correct solutions:

 - David H., Taiwan;
-->

Know how to solve this?
Join the list of solvers by [emailing me][email] your solution!


# Solution

I'll share the solution to this problem after it has been live for 2 weeks.


[Don't forget to subscribe to the newsletter][subscribe] to get bi-weekly
problems sent straight to your inbox.

[email]: mailto:rodrigo@mathspp.com?subject=Solution%20to%20{{ page.title|regex_replace(['/ /'], ['%20']) }}
[subscribe]: /subscribe

Commit message:

Add credit for the one who suggested the problem.

pages/02.blog/02.problems/p053-weighing-the-odd-one-out/item.md, after:

Can you find the fake ball by weighing it?

===

![](thumbnail.png "Photo by AlSimonov on Getty Images.")

# Problem statement

You have 12 balls, 11 of which are identical and weigh exactly the same.
The 12th ball _looks_ like all the others, but it is fake, and is either lighter or heavier.

Can you figure out which of the 12 balls is the fake one and whether it is lighter or heavier than the others?
You can make use of a [traditional scale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weighing_scale) with two plates,
although you have no weights at your disposal.
Also, the scale is so rusty it will stop working soon and you can only use it three times.

This problem was proposed by Attila, a fellow solver from previous problems.


# Solvers

<!--
Congratulations to the ones that solved this problem correctly and, in particular, to the ones
who sent me their correct solutions:

 - David H., Taiwan;
-->

Know how to solve this?
Join the list of solvers by [emailing me][email] your solution!


# Solution

I'll share the solution to this problem after it has been live for 2 weeks.


[Don't forget to subscribe to the newsletter][subscribe] to get bi-weekly
problems sent straight to your inbox.

[email]: mailto:rodrigo@mathspp.com?subject=Solution%20to%20{{ page.title|regex_replace(['/ /'], ['%20']) }}
[subscribe]: /subscribe
