pages/02.blog/01.problems/p030-efficiency-at-the-beach/item.en.md, before:

---
metadata:
    description: "A simple problem that builds around the experience of sunbathing in a beach."
title: "Problem #030 - efficiency at the beach"
---

You are sunbathing when you decide to go and talk to some friends
under a nearby sun umbrella, but first you want to get your
feet wet in the water.
What is the most efficient way to do this?

===

![](thumbnail.png "Edited version of Alex Perez's photo on Unsplash")

### Problem statement

The problem statement is just like you read above.
You are on the sand and need to go to another place on the sand,
but first you need to go to the shoreline, which you can assume
is a straight line:

![](_straight_shoreline.png "Shoreline represented as a straight line")

How do you pick your path so that you walk as little as possible
(because the sand is really hot!)?

!!! Give it some thought...

If you need any clarification whatsoever, feel free to ask in the comment section below.

### Solution

The solution to this problem will be posted [here][sol] after this problem has been live for 2 weeks.
Feel free to [email me][email] your solution if you want it featured in the [solution page][sol].
<!--You can read the solution [here][sol] to compare with your own solution.
You can also use that link to post your own solution in the comments! Please avoid posting spoilers in the comments here.-->

---

If you enjoyed the problem and would like to get new problems directly in your inbox, be sure to [subscribe to the Problems newsletter][subscribe].

[email]: mailto:rodrigo@mathspp.com?subject=Solution%20to%20{{ page.title|regex_replace(['/ /'], ['%20']) }}
[subscribe]: https://mathspp.com/subscribe
[sol]: ../../solutions/{{ page.slug }}

Commit message:

Update solution and problem files.

pages/02.blog/01.problems/p030-efficiency-at-the-beach/item.en.md, after:

---
metadata:
    description: "A simple problem that builds around the experience of sunbathing in a beach."
title: "Problem #030 - efficiency at the beach"
---

You are sunbathing when you decide to go and talk to some friends
under a nearby sun umbrella, but first you want to get your
feet wet in the water.
What is the most efficient way to do this?

===

![](thumbnail.png "Edited version of Alex Perez's photo on Unsplash")

### Problem statement

The problem statement is just like you read above.
You are on the sand and need to go to another place on the sand,
but first you need to go to the shoreline, which you can assume
is a straight line:

![](_straight_shoreline.png "Shoreline represented as a straight line")

How do you pick your path so that you walk as little as possible
(because the sand is really hot!)?

!!! Give it some thought...

If you need any clarification whatsoever, feel free to ask in the comment section below.

### Solution

You can read the solution [here][sol] to compare with your own solution.
You can also use that link to post your own solution in the comments! Please avoid posting spoilers in the comments here.

---

If you enjoyed the problem and would like to get new problems directly in your inbox, be sure to [subscribe to the Problems newsletter][subscribe].

[email]: mailto:rodrigo@mathspp.com?subject=Solution%20to%20{{ page.title|regex_replace(['/ /'], ['%20']) }}
[subscribe]: https://mathspp.com/subscribe
[sol]: ../../solutions/{{ page.slug }}
