---
date: 04-05-2026 18:50
metadata:
    author: Rodrigo Girão Serrão
    description: "Learn how to use red-green TDD to have LLMs generate code that works more reliably."
    og:image: "https://mathspp.com/insider/archive/llms-need-guardrails/thumbnail.webp"
    twitter:image: "https://mathspp.com/insider/archive/llms-need-guardrails/thumbnail.webp"
title: "LLMs need guardrails"

process:
  twig: true
cache_enable: false
---

# 🐍🚀 LLMs need guardrails

 > This is a past issue of the [mathspp insider 🐍🚀](/insider) newsletter. [Subscribe to the mathspp insider 🐍🚀](/insider) to get weekly Python deep dives like this one on your inbox!

## Code is getting really cheap

With the advent of LLMs, it becoming really cheap to produce code.

You write a couple of sentences.

You wait a couple of minutes.

And suddenly you have a script that's 300–500 lines of code long.

And it _feels_ like it didn't cost you anything.

You run it a couple of times.

And then you might even _delete it_.

## Code is becoming disposable

Up until recently I had a very hard time deleting old scripts.

Even if they were ugly.

Even if I no longer used them.

They were a product of my hard work and I liked keeping them around, as a record of what I'd done.

Nowadays, if I get an LLM to write a simple script to save me 15 minutes, I'll delete it afterwards.

I did it this weekend.

I asked the LLM to write a CLI that merged the CSV files I passed into it as long as their headers matched.

I _could_ write that script...

But the LLM was faster.

I ran the script.

And then I _deleted it_...

I didn't even read the code.

It would either work or not.

And it worked, so that's everything I needed.

## Does it work?

At this point, with LLMs generating so much code for us, the most important question is becoming “does it work?”.

It's still important to understand what's going on.

It's still important to have a solid knowledge foundation.

But the most practical and most important question is whether it works or not.

And so it's good to know about the tools and techniques that increase the likelihood of LLMs writing code that works.

One of my favourite techniques so far is that of using something called **red-green TDD**.

## Red-green TDD

**TDD** stands for **test-driven development**, a workflow in which you start by writing the tests for your code and only then you write your code.

As a Human, following this workflow is painful.

But LLMs don't care.

You can tell them to write tests before writing code and they won't “feel demotivated”.

Because they don't _feel_ at all!

**Red-green TDD** works like this:

 1. you start by writing a test for a new feature
 2. you run the tests and _verify that the new test fails_ (hence, red)
 3. you implement the feature in the simplest way possible that makes the test pass
 4. you run the tests and _verify that they all pass_ (hence, green)
 5. you refactor the code if needed while keeping all tests green

Step 2. might look superfluous but it is surprisingly important.

LLMs will happily generate useless tests.

So step 2. ensures that the tests generated by the LLM are _useful_.

That's it.

How do you use this?

When you tell an LLM to work on something, just start by telling them to “use red-green TDD”.

They've consumed enough information online to understand what this means.

## What other techniques do you employ?

What other techniques do you employ when working with LLMs?

Reply to this email to let me know.

## Enjoyed reading? 🐍🚀

Get a Python deep dive 🐍🚀 every Monday by dropping your best email address below:

{% include "forms/form.html.twig" with {form: forms( {route: '/insider/_intro'} ) } %}
